---
backward: "[[Content/Development/C/K&R/0. Introduction|0. Introduction]]"
forward: "[[1.2 Variables and Arithmetic]]"
parent: "[[Welcome to C]]"
---

The only way to learn a new programming language is by writing programs in it. The first program to write is the same for all languages:

Print the words

```
hello, world
```

This is the basic hurdle; to leap over it you have to be able to create the program text somewhere, compile it successfully, load it, run it, and find out where your output went. With these mechanical details mastered, everything else is comparatively easy.

In traditional C, the program to print "hello, world" is

```C
main()
{
    printf("hello, world\n");
}
```

The modern minimal version of this program needs a bit more syntax:

```C
#include <stdio.h>
main() {
    printf("hello, world\n");
}
```

Just how to run this program depends on the system you are using. As a specific example, on the UNIX operating system you must create the source program in a file whose name ends in `".c"`, such as `hello.c`, then compile it with the command

```
cc hello.c
```

If you haven't botched anything, such as omitting a character or misspelling something, the compilation will proceed silently, and make an executable file called `a.out.` Running that by the command

```
a.out
```

will produce

```
hello, world
```

as its output. On other systems, the rules will be different; check with a local expert.

On modern systems, we use the `gcc` compiler with the `-ansi` option to accept the "legacy" syntax of C:

```
gcc -ansi hello.c
```

To run the resulting `a.out` file, usually you need to pre-pend the local directory because most shell configurations do not include the current path in the paths to search for applications:

```
./a.out
```

**Exercise 1-1.** Run this program on your system. Experiment with leaving out parts of the program, to see what error messages you get.

Now for some explanations about the program itself. A C program, whatever its size, consists of one or more "functions" which specify the actual computing operations that are to be done. C functions are similar to the functions and subroutines of a Fortran program or the procedures of PL/I, Pascal, etc. In our example, `main` is such a function. Normally you are at liberty to give functions whatever names you like, but `main` is a special name - your program begins executing at the beginning of `main`. This means that every program _must_ have a `main` somewhere. `main` will usually invoke other functions to perform its job, some coming from the same program, and others from libraries of previously written functions.

One method of communicating data between functions is by arguments. The parentheses following the function name surround the argument list; here `main` is a function of no arguments, indicated by `()`. The braces `{` `}` enclose the statements that make up the function; they are analogous to the `DO-END` of PL/I, or the `begin-end` of Algol, Pascal, and so on. A function is invoked by naming it, followed by a parenthesized list of arguments.

There is no `CALL` statement as there is in Fortran or PL/I. The parentheses must be present even if there are no arguments.

> [!NOTE]
> In the above text, the authors were making connections to the popular general purpose languages of the time. When the book was written, it was not at all assured that C and C-like languages would ever evolve past writing high performance applications like operating system kernels and device drivers. By comparing C to these more "general purpose" languages, the authors are trying to plant the seed that C could have value as a general purpose language.

The line that says

```C
printf("hello, world\n");
```

is a function call, which calls a function named `printf`, with the argument `"hello, world\n"`. `printf` is a library function which prints output on the terminal (unless some other destination is specified). In this case it prints the string of characters that make up its argument.

A sequence of any number of characters enclosed in the double quotes is called a _character string_ or _string constant._ For the moment our only use of character strings will be as arguments for `printf` and other functions.

The sequence `\n` in the string is C notation for the _newline character,_ which when printed advances the terminal to the left margin on the next line. If you leave out the `\n` (a worthwhile experiment), you will find that your output is not terminated by a line feed. The only way to get a newline character into the `printf` argument is with `\n`; if you try something like

```C
printf("hello, world
");
```

the C compiler will print unfriendly diagnostics about missing quotes. `printf` never supplies a newline automatically, so multiple calls may be used to build up an output line in stages. Our first program could just as well have been written

```C
main()
{
    printf("hello, ");
    printf("world");
    printf("\n");
}
```

to produce an identical output.

Notice that `\n` represents only a single character. An _escape sequence_ like `\n` provides a general and extensible mechanism for representing hard-to-get or invisible characters. Among the others that C provides are `\t` for tab, `\b` for backspace, `\"` for the double quote, and `\\` for the backslash itself.

**Exercise 1-2.** Experiment to find out what happens when printf's argument string contains `\x`, where `x` is some character not listed above.
