---
backward: "[[1.1 Getting Started]]"
forward: "[[1.3 The For Statement]]"
---

The next program prints the following table of Fahrenheit temperatures and their centigrade or Celsius equivalents, using the formula `C=(5/9)(F-32)`.

|Fahrenheit|Celsius|
|---|---|
|0|-17.8|
|20|-6.7|
|40|4.4|
|60|15.6|
|260|126.7|
|280|137.8|
|300|148.9|

Here is the program itself.
```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* print Fahrenheit-Celsius table
for f = 0, 20, ..., 300 */

main()
{
    int lower, upper, step;
    float fahr, celsius;
    lower = 0; /* lower limit of temperature table */
    upper = 300; /* upper limit */
    step = 20; /* step size */
    fahr = lower;

    while (fahr <= upper) {
        celsius = (5.0/9.0) * (fahr-32.0);
        printf("%4.0f %6.1f\n", fahr, celsius);
        fahr = fahr + step;
    }
}
```

The first two lines

```c
/* print Fahrenheit-Celsius table
for f = 0, 20, ..., 300 */
```

are a _comment,_ which in this case explains briefly what the program does. Any characters between `/*` and `*/` are ignored by the compiler; they may be used freely to make a program easier to understand. Comments may appear anywhere a blank or newline can.

In C, _all_ variables must be declared before use, usually at the beginning of the function before any executable statements. If you forget a declaration, you will get a diagnostic from the compiler. A declaration consists of a _type_ and a list of variables which have that type, as in

```c
int lower, upper, step;
float fahr, celsius;
```

The type `int` implies that the variables listed are _integers;_ `float` stands for _floating point,_ i.e., numbers which may have a fractional part. The precision of both `int` and `float` depends on the particular machine you are using. On the PDP-11, for instance, an `int` is a 16-bit signed number, that is, one which lies between -32768 and +32767. A `float` number is a 32-bit quantity, which amounts to about seven significant digits, with magnitude between about 10-38 and 10+38. [Chapter 2](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap02.md) lists sizes for other machines.

> [!NOTE]
> The 1970's was a time of transition in the amount of memory installed in computers. The C language `int` type was 16 bits in the older but more generally available computers like the PDP/11. C could be used to write programs like the UNIX operating that made efficient use of available memory. In particular the 1978 version of C did not _require_ that computers support 32 bit integers. But 32,768 is a pretty small number. The size of an integer affected the maximum size of arrays and strings. A lot of early C programs used the `long` type to get at least a 32-bit integer capable of representing numbers up to about two billion. In modern computers and databases we tend to choose between 32 bit and 64 bit integers.

C provides several other basic data types besides `int` and `float`:

|Type|Description|
|---|---|
|char|character - a single byte|
|short|short integer|
|long|long integer|
|double|double-precision floating point|

The sizes of these objects are also machine-dependent; details are in [Chapter 2](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap02.md). There are also _arrays_, _structures_ and _unions_ of these basic types, _pointers_ to them, and _functions_ that return them, all of which we will meet in due course.

Actual computation in the temperature conversion program begins with the assignments

```C
lower = 0;
upper = 300;
step = 20;
fahr = lower;
```

which set the variables to their starting values. Individual statements are terminated by semicolons.

Each line of the table is computed the same way, so we use a loop which repeats once per line; this is the purpose of the `while` statement

```C
while (fahr <= upper) {
    ...
}
```

The condition in parentheses is tested. If it is true (`fahr` is less than or equal to `upper`), the body of the loop (all of the statements enclosed by the braces `{` and `}`) is executed. Then the condition is re-tested, and if `true`, the body is executed again. When the test becomes `false` (`fahr` exceeds `upper`) the loop ends, and execution continues at the statement that follows the loop. There are no further statements in this program, so it terminates.

The body of a `while` can be one or more statements enclosed in braces, as in the temperature converter, or a single statement without braces, as in

```C
while (i < j)
    i = 2 * i;
```

In either case, the statements controlled by the `while` are indented by one tab stop so you can see at a glance what statements are inside the loop. The indentation emphasizes the logical structure of the program. Although C is quite permissive about statement positioning, proper indentation and use of white space are critical in making programs easy for people to read. We recommend writing only one statement per line, and (usually) leaving blanks around operators. The position of braces is less important; we have chosen one of several popular styles. Pick a style that suits you, then use it consistently.

> [!NOTE]
> With these words, the authors triggered a "great debate" about how to best indent code and use braces that continues to this day. The indentation style used in this book is often referred to as "K&R style". It tends to put open braces at the end of statements like `if` and `while` to keep code more compact in terms of number of lines of code.
> 
> The best advice is not to debate at all. When you modify someone else's code imitate the existing style of code.

Most of the work gets done in the body of the loop. The Celsius temperature is computed and assigned to `celsius` by the statement

```c
celsius = (5.0/9.0) * (fahr-32.0);
```

The reason for using `5.0/9.0` instead of the simpler looking `5/9` is that in C, as in many other languages, integer division _truncates,_ so any fractional part is discarded. Thus `5/9` is zero and of course so would be all the temperatures. A decimal point in a constant indicates that it is floating point, so `5.0/9.0` is 0.555..., which is what we want.

We also wrote `32.0` instead of `32`, even though since `fahr` is a `float`, `32` would be automatically converted to `float` (to `32.0`) before the subtraction. As a matter of style, it's wise to write floating point constants with explicit decimal points even when they have integral values; it emphasizes their floating point nature for human readers, and ensures that the compiler will see things your way too.

> [!NOTE]
> For those of you familiar with Python, before Python 3, integer division truncated and returned an integer, _just like C_. In Python 3, one of the major improvements was that the division of two integers performed the division operation in floating point and returns a floating point result.
> 
> C and Python 2 made the choice because of efficiency. Integer division with truncation (especially for 16-bit numbers) was quite fast in 1970's computers compared to floating point division that kept the fractional part intact. Early PDP/11 computers did integer division in _hardware_ while floating point was done with loops and functions so it was far slower. If you wanted to write fast code in the 1970's you avoided floating point numbers except for in special situations.
> 
> Modern computers usually do 64-bit floating point operations at almost the same speed as integer division so we don't need to allow programmers to avoid using floating point computations in their code.

The detailed rules for when integers are converted to floating point are in [Chapter 2](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap02.md). For now, notice that the assignment

```C
fahr = lower;
```

and the test

```C
while (fahr <= upper)
```

both work as expected - the `int` is converted to `float` before the operation is done.

This example also shows a bit more of how `printf` works. `printf` is actually a general-purpose format conversion function, which we will describe completely in [Chapter 7](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap07.md). Its first argument is a string of characters to be printed, with each `%` sign indicating where one of the other (second, third, ...) arguments is to be substituted, and what form it is to be printed in. For instance, in the statement

```C
printf("%4.0f %6.1f\n" , fahr, celsius);
```

the conversion specification `%4.0f` says that a floating point number is to be printed in a space at least four characters wide, with no digits after the decimal point. `%6.1f` describes another number to occupy at least six spaces, with 1 digit after the decimal point, analogous to the `F6.1` of Fortran or the `F(6,1)` of PL/I. Parts of a specification may be omitted: `%6f` says that the number is to be at least six characters wide; `%.2f` requests two places after the decimal point, but the width is not constrained; and `%f` merely says to print the number as floating point. `printf` also recognizes `%d` for decimal integer, `%o` for octal, `%x` for hexadecimal, `%c` for character, `%s` for character string, and `%%` for % itself.

Each `%` construction in the first argument of `printf` is paired with its corresponding second, third, etc., argument; they must line up properly by number and type, or you'll get meaningless answers.

By the way, `printf` is _not_ part of the C language; there is no input or output defined in C itself. There is nothing magic about `printf`; it is just a useful function which is part of the standard library of routines that are normally accessible to C programs. In order to concentrate on C itself, we won't talk much about I/O until [Chapter 7](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap07.md). In particular, we will defer formatted input until then. If you have to input numbers, read the discussion of the function `scanf` in [Chapter 7](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap07.md), section 7.4. `scanf` is much like `printf`, except that it reads input instead of writing output.

> [!NOTE]
> The balance between building a feature into the language itself and providing it as a function in a library is something that computer language designers struggle with many years later. For example, in Python 2, `print` was a language element. In Python 3, one of the non-upwards compatible and somewhat unpopular changes was changing `print()` to be a function. Many programmers feel that a `print` statement is a more elegant way to express printing, but from a compiler and language design perspective a function call with a variable number of parameters is seen as technically more elegant and flexible.
> 
> With Kernighan and Ritchie focused on keeping everything small and portable they opted to keep all input / output (I/O) functionality in libraries. The syntax is a little more complex - but give how computing changed in the past 30 years, it is the right choice.

**Exercise 1-3.** Modify the temperature conversion program to print a heading above the table.

**Exercise 1-4.** Write a program to print the corresponding Celsius to Fahrenheit table.

> [!note-toolbar|button-between] Tutorial-Nav
> - [:LiArrowLeftCircle:](<1.1 Getting Started>) <!-- Backward -->
> - [:LiArrowRightCircle:](<1.3 The For Statement>) <!-- Forward -->
