---
backward: "[[1.2 Variables and Arithmetic]]"
forward: "[[1.2 Variables and Arithmetic]]"
---

As you might expect, there are plenty of different ways to write a program; let's try a variation on the temperature converter.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* Fahrenheit-Celsius table */
{
    int fahr;

    for (fahr = 0; fahr <= 300; fahr = fahr + 20)
        printf("%4d %6.1f\n", fahr, (5.0/9.0)*(fahr-32));
}
```

This produces the same answers, but it certainly looks different. One major change is the elimination of most of the variables; only `fahr` remains, as an `int` (to show the `%d` conversion in `printf`). The lower and upper limits and the step size appear only as constants in the `for` statement, itself a new construction, and the expression that computes the Celsius temperature now appears as the third argument of `printf` instead of in a separate assignment statement.

This last change is an instance of a quite general rule in C - in any context where it is permissible to use the value of a variable of some type, you can use an expression of that type. Since the third argument of `printf` has to be a floating point value to match the `%6.1f`, any floating point expression can occur there.

The `for` itself is a loop, a generalization of the `while`. If you compare it to the earlier `while`, its operation should be clear. It contains three parts, separated by semicolons. The first part

```c
fahr = 0
```

is done once, before the loop proper is entered. The second part is the test or condition that controls the loop:

```c
fahr <= 300
```

This condition is evaluated; if it is true, the body of the loop (here a single `printf`) is executed. Then the re-initialization step

```c
fahr = fahr + 20
```

is done, and the condition re-evaluated. The loop terminates when the condition becomes false. As with the `while`, the body of the loop can be a single statement, or a group of statements enclosed in braces. The initialization and re-initialization parts can be any single expression.

The choice between `while` and `for` is arbitrary, based on what seems clearer. The `for` is usually appropriate for loops in which the initialization and re-initialization are single statements and logically related, since it is more compact than `while` and keeps the loop control statements together in one place.

The syntax of the `for` and `while` loops is a feature of C-like languages. In modern languages we tend to have two kinds of loop structures - determinant and in-determinant. The `for` and `while` loop structures are indeterminate because you must read them closely to make sure they are properly constructed and, for example, are not unintentionally "infinite loops".

An example of a determinant loop is the `foreach` loop in PHP or `for` loop in Python. The semantics of both of these loops is to iterate over all of the elements in a collection. Because the collections are not infinite, you can be assured that these determinant loops will not run forever.

**Exercise 1-5.** Modify the temperature conversion program to print the table in reverse order, that is, from 300 degrees to 0.

> [!note-toolbar|button-between] Tutorial-Nav
> - [:LiArrowLeftCircle:](<1.2 Variables and Arithmetic>) <!-- Backward -->
> - [:LiArrowRightCircle:](<1.2 Variables and Arithmetic>) <!-- Forward -->
