---
backward: "[[1.4 Symbolic Constants]]"
forward: "[[1.6 Arrays]]"
parent: "[[Welcome to C]]"
---
We are now going to consider a family of related programs for doing simple operations on character data. You will find that many programs are just expanded versions of the prototypes that we discuss here.

 **Character Input and Output**

The standard library provides functions for reading and writing a character at a time. `getchar()` fetches the _next input character_ each time it is called, and returns that character as its value. That is, after

```c
c = getchar()
```

the variable `c` contains the next character of input. The characters normally come from the terminal, but that need not concern us until [Chapter 7](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap07.md).

The function `putchar(c)` is the complement of `getchar`:

```c
putchar(c)
```

prints the contents of variable `c` on some output medium, again usually the terminal. Calls to `putchar` and `printf` may be interleaved; the output will appear in the order in which the calls are made.

As with `printf`, there is nothing special about `getchar` and `putchar`. They are not part of the C language, but they are universally available.

> [!NOTE]
> Once again, the authors are making the case that the syntax of the language should not include syntax for Input/Output operations but instead call library functions.
> 
> Keeping the compiler small and easy to port to new systems was important. And even if something like `putchar` was part of the language syntax, it would be translated at run-time to call a function.
> 
> Programming languages from the 1960's tended to have a very small set of use cases - read some input, run some calculations, and write to files - so it seemed like a few language elements would be sufficient to describe all programs. But as programs started to make network connections, draw buttons on a screen, and respond to API calls over the network - it would have been difficult to keep expanding core language syntax for each new use case. But it was natural to add new libraries with functions to call to accomplish these new use cases.

## File Copying

Given `getchar` and `putchar`, you can write a surprising amount of useful code without knowing anything more about I/O. The simplest example is a program which copies its input to its output one character at a time. In outline,

```
get a character
while (character is not end file signal)
    output the character just read
    get a new character
```

Converting this into C gives

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* copy input to output; 1st version */
{
    int c;
    c = getchar();

    while (c != EOF) {
        putchar(c);
        c = getchar();
    }
}
```

The relational operator `!=` means "not equal to."

The main problem is detecting the end of the input. By convention, `getchar` returns a value which is not a valid character when it encounters the end of the input; in this way, programs can detect when they run out of input. The only complication, a serious nuisance, is that there are _two_ conventions in common use about what that end of file value really is. We have deferred the issue by using the symbolic name `EOF` for the value, whatever it might be. In practice, `EOF` will be either -1 or 0, so the program must be preceded by the appropriate one of

```c
#define EOF -1
```

or

```c
#define EOF 0
```

in order to work properly. By using the symbolic constant `EOF` to represent the value that `getchar` returns when end of file occurs, we are assured that only one thing in the program depends on the specific numeric value.

> [!NOTE]
> Modern C compilers define `EOF` in the `stdio.h` include file - so you should never define `EOF` in your code. In modern C, the value of `EOF` is -1, but you should just include `stdio.h` and use the pre-defined `EOF` constant to check for end of file.
> 
> The "nuisance" of different values for `EOF` was resolved shortly after 1978.

We also declare `c` to be an `int`, not a `char`, so it can hold the value which `getchar` returns. As we shall see in [Chapter 2](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap02.md), this value is actually an `int`, since it must be capable of representing `EOF` in addition to all possible `char`'s.

The program for copying would actually be written more concisely by experienced C programmers. In C, any assignment, such as

```c
c = getchar()
```

can be used in an expression; its value is simply the value being assigned to the left hand side. If the assignment of a character to c is put inside the test part of a `while`, the file copy program can be written

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* copy input to output; 2nd version */
{
    int c;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
        putchar(c);
}
```

The program gets a character, assigns it to `c`, and then tests whether the character was the end of file signal. If it was not, the body of the `while` is executed, printing the character. The `while` then repeats. When the end of the input is finally reached, the `while` terminates and so does `main`.

This version centralizes the input - there is now only one call to `getchar` - and shrinks the program. Nesting an assignment in a test is one of the places where C permits a valuable conciseness. (It's possible to get carried away and create impenetrable code, though, a tendency that we will try to curb.)

It's important to recognize that the parentheses around the assignment within the conditional are really necessary. The _precedence_ of `!=` is higher than that of `=`, which means that in the absence of parentheses the relational test `!=` would be done before the assignment `=`. So the statement

```c
c = getchar() != EOF
```

is equivalent to

```c
c = (getchar() != EOF)
```

This has the undesired effect of setting `c` to 0 or 1, depending on whether or not the call of `getchar` encountered end of file. (More on this in [Chapter 2](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap02.md).)

## Character Counting

The next program counts characters; it is a small elaboration of the copy program.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* count characters in input */
{
    long nc;

    nc = 0;
    while (getchar() != EOF)
        ++nc;
    printf("%ld\n", nc);
}
```

The statement

```
++nc;
```

shows a new operator, `++`, which means _increment by one._ You could write `nc = nc + 1` but `++nc` is more concise and often more efficient. There is a corresponding operator `--` to decrement by 1. The operators `++` and `--` can be either prefix operators (`++nc`) or postfix (`nc++`); these two forms have different values in expressions, as will be shown in [Chapter 2](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap02.md), but `++nc` and `nc++` both increment `nc`. For the moment we will stick to prefix.

The character counting program accumulates its count in a `long` variable instead of an `int`. On a PDP-11 the maximum value of an `int` is 32767, and it would take relatively little input to overflow the counter if it were declared `int`; in Honeywell and IBM C, `long` and `int` are synonymous and much larger. The conversion specification `%ld` signals to `printf` that the corresponding argument is a long integer.

> [!NOTE]
> We see another reference to the fact that the number of bits in the `int` type is in transition in 1978. The older PDP-11 used a 16-bit integer to save limited memory while later computers from IBM and Honeywell have already switched to an `int` type that is 32-bits. This allowed code originally written for a PDP/11 like UNIX or even the C compiler to be recompiled on an IBM or Honeywell with very few changes.

To cope with even bigger numbers, you can use a `double` (double length `float`). We will also use a `for` statement instead of a `while`, to illustrate an alternative way to write the loop.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* count characters in input */
{
    double nc;

    for (nc = 0; getchar() != EOF; ++nc)
        ;
    printf("%.0f\n", nc);
}
```

`printf` uses `%f` for both `float` and `double`; `%.0f` suppresses printing of the non-existent fraction part.

The body of the `for` loop here is _empty,_ because all of the work is done in the test and re-initialization parts. But the grammatical rules of C require that a `for` statement have a body. The isolated semicolon, technically a _null_ _statement,_ is there to satisfy that requirement. We put it on a separate line to make it more visible.

Before we leave the character counting program, observe that if the input contains no characters, the `while` or `for` test fails on the very first call to `getchar`, and so the program produces zero, the right answer. This is an important observation. One of the nice things about `while` and `for` is that they test at the _top_ of the loop, before proceeding with the body. If there is nothing to do, nothing is done, even if that means never going through the loop body. Programs should act intelligently when handed input like "no characters." The `while` and `for` statements help ensure that they do reasonable things with boundary conditions.

## Line Counting

The next program counts _lines_ in its input. Input lines are assumed to be terminated by the newline character `\n` that has been religiously appended to every line written out.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* count lines in input */
{
    int c, nl;

    nl = 0;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
        if (c == '\n')
            ++nl;
    printf("%d\n", nl);
}
```

The body of the `while` now consists of an `if`, which in turn controls the increment `++nl`. The `if` statement tests the parenthesized condition, and if it is `true`, does the statement (or group of statements in braces) that follows. We have again indented to show what is controlled by what.

The double equals sign `==` is the C notation for "is equal to" (like Fortran's `.EQ.`). This symbol is used to distinguish the equality test from the single `=` used for assignment. Since assignment is about twice as frequent as equality testing in typical C programs, it's appropriate that the operator be half as long.

Any single character can be written between single quotes, to produce a value equal to the numerical value of the character in the machine's character set; this is called a _character constant._ So, for example, `'A'` is a character constant; in the ASCII character set its value is 65, the internal representation of the character `A`. Of course `'A'` is to be preferred over `65`: its meaning is obvious, and it is independent of a particular character set.

The escape sequences used in character strings are also legal in character constants, so in tests and arithmetic expressions, `'\n'` stands for the value of the newline character. You should note carefully that `'\n'` is a single character, and in expressions is equivalent to a single integer; on the other hand, `"\n"` is a character string which happens to contain only one character. The topic of strings versus characters is discussed further in [Chapter 2](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap02.md).

> [!NOTE]
> The numeric values that are shown for characters are using the [ASCII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) character set. Character sets in the 1970's were quite intricate. Most were eight bits long to conserve computer memory and only support 100 or so supported Latin-like characters. This is why early programming languages use special characters like `*` and `{` in their syntax very carefully. They needed to choose characters that were commonly available on computer keyboards from different manufacturers.
> 
> Modern languages like Python 3 and Ruby store internal string values using the [Unicode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode) character set so they are able to represent all characters in all languages around the world. Modern languages tend to represent eight bit values (range 0-255) using a `byte` or similar type. Python 2 strings were stored as 8-bit bytes and Python 3 strings are stored as 32-bit Unicode characters. Moving to Unicode was a major effort in the Python 2 to Python 3 transition.

**Exercise 1-6.** Write a program to count blanks, tabs, and newlines.

**Exercise 1-7.** Write a program to copy its input to its output, replacing each string of one or more blanks by a single blank.

**Exercise 1-8.** Write a program to replace each tab by the three-character sequence >, _backspace, -,_ which prints as >, and each backspace by the similar sequence <. This makes tabs and backspaces visible.

## Word Counting

The fourth in our series of useful programs counts lines, words, and characters, with the loose definition that a word is any sequence of characters that does not contain a blank, tab or newline. (This is a bare-bones version of the UNIX utility _wc_.)

```c
#include <stdio.h>

#define YES 1
#define NO  0

main() /* count lines, words, chars in input */
{
    int c, nl, nw, nc, inword;

    inword = NO;
    nl = nw = nc = 0;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF) {
        ++nc;
        if (c == '\n' )
            ++nl;
        if (c == ' ' || c == '\n' || c == '\t' )
            inword = NO;
        else if ( inword == NO ) {
            inword = YES;
            ++nw;
        }
    }
    printf("%d %d %d\n", nl, nw, nc);
}
```

Every time the program encounters the first character of a word, it counts it. The variable `inword` records whether the program is currently in a word or not; initially it is "not in a word," which is assigned the value `NO`. We prefer the symbolic constants `YES` and `NO` to the literal values `1` and `0` because they make the program more readable. Of course in a program as tiny as this, it makes little difference, but in larger programs, the increase in clarity is well worth the modest extra effort to write it this way originally. You'll also find that it's easier to make extensive changes in programs where numbers appear only as symbolic constants.

The line

```c
nl = nw = nc = 0;
```

sets all three variables to zero. This is not a special case, but a consequence of the fact that an assignment has a value and assignments associate right to left. It's really as if we had written

```c
nc = (nl = (nw = O));
```

The operator `||` means _OR_, so the line

```c
if (c == ' ' || c == '\n' || c == '\t' )
```

says "if `c` is a blank _or_ `c` is a newline _or_ `c` is a tab ...". (The escape sequence `\t` is a visible representation of the tab character.) There is a corresponding operator `&&` for AND. Expressions connected by `&&` or `||` are evaluated left to right, and it is guaranteed that evaluation will stop as soon as the truth or falsehood is known. Thus if `c` contains a blank, there is no need to test whether it contains a newline or tab, so these tests are _not_ made. This isn't particularly important here, but is very significant in more complicated situations, as we will soon see.

> [!NOTE]
> The `||` and `&&` are the norm for boolean operators in "C-like" languages. When a new language was being designed, it was easy to adopt the C conventions for logical operators because, while they are cryptic, millions of software developers already were familiar with the operators. In this way, the relationship between C and C-like languages is like the relationship between Latin and the Romance languages including English.

The example also shows the C `else` statement, which specifies an alternative action to be done if the condition part of an `if` statement is false. The general form is

```c
if (expression)
    statement-1
else
    statement-2
```

One and only one of the two statements associated with an `if-else` is done. If the _expression_ is true, _statement-1_ is executed; if not, _statement-2_ is executed. Each _statement_ can in fact be quite complicated. In the word count program, the one after the `else` is an `if` that controls two statements in braces.

**Exercise 1-9.** How would you test the word count program? What are some boundaries?

**Exercise 1-10.** Write a program which prints the words in its input, one per line.

**Exercise 1-11.** Revise the word count program to use a better definition of "word," for example, a sequence of letters, digits and apostrophes that begins with a letter.