---
backward: "[[1.5 A Collection of Useful Programs]]"
forward: "[[1.7 Functions]]"
---

> [!NOTE]
> Understanding the capabilities and limitations of C arrays is one of the the most important topics in our historical look at the C Programming language. Most importantly, the number of elements in an array declaration must be a _constant_ at compile time and the size of an array _cannot_ be adjusted using an array declaration while the program is running.
> 
> This inability to automatically resize C arrays as data is added, leads to a class of security flaws that are generally referred to as ["buffer overflow"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buffer_overflow) where a program reads more data than can fit into an array and is tricked to overwriting other data or code and compromising an application.
> 
> Later in the book, we will create dynamic array-like structures in C using pointers and the standard library `calloc()` function.
> 
> Python has support for non-dynamic arrays (buffers). Python buffers are generally not used except for programmers writing library code that talks to low-level code written in a language other than Python or talking to the operating system such as Linux. The more commonly used Python `list` and `dict` structures _can_ change their sizes automatically as elements are added and deleted at run-time.
> 
> Java has support for non-dynamic arrays like C which are given a length at the moment they are created and the array length cannot be increased nor decreased without making a new array and copying all the elements from the first to the second array. Java provides `list` and `map` structures that automatically adjust their length as data is added or removed. Java has a class called an `ArrayList` which can be dynamically extended but provides array-like linear access. It _is_ a list internally but can be _used_ like an array externally.
> 
> The underlying technique that is used to implement language structures like Python's `list` is dynamic memory allocation and a "linked list" structure. Linked lists are one of the most important data structures in all of Computer Science. We cover dynamic allocation and implementing data structures in C in [Chapter 6](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap06.md).
> 
> So for now, we will examine the syntax of C arrays - but keep in mind that allocating an array in C is very different than creating a `list` in Python.

Let us write a program to count the number of occurrences of each digit, of white space characters (blank, tab, newline), and all other characters. This is artificial, of course, but it permits us to illustrate several aspects of C in one program.

There are twelve categories of input, so it is convenient to use an array to hold the number of occurrences of each digit, rather than ten individual variables. Here is one version of the program:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* count digits, white space, others */
{
    int c, i, nwhite, nother;
    int ndigit[10];

    nwhite = nother = 0;
    for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
        ndigit[i] = 0;

    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
        if (c >= '0' && c <= '9')
            ++ndigit[c-'0'];
        else if (c == ' ' || c == '\n' || c == '\t')
            ++nwhite;
        else
            ++nother;

    printf("digits =");

    for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
        printf(" %d", ndigit[i]);

    printf("\nwhite space = %d, other = %d\n",
        nwhite, nother);
}
```

The declaration

```c
int ndigit[10];
```

declares `ndigit` to be an array of 10 integers. Array subscripts always start at zero in C (rather than 1 as in Fortran or PL/I, so the elements are `ndigit[0]`, `ndigit[1]`, ... `ndigit[9]`. This is reflected in the `for` loops which initialize and print the array.

A subscript can be any integer expression, which of course includes integer variables like `i`, and integer constants.

This particular program relies heavily on the properties of the character representation of the digits. For example, the test

```c
if (c >= '0' && c <= '9') ...
```

determines whether the character in `c` is a digit. If it is, the numeric value of that digit is

```c
c - '0'
```

This works only if '0', '1', etc., are positive and in increasing order, and if there is nothing but digits between 0 and 9. Fortunately, this is true for all conventional character sets.

By definition, arithmetic involving char's and int's converts everything to `int` before proceeding, so `char` variables and constants are essentially identical to int's in arithmetic contexts. This is quite natural and convenient; for example, `c - '0'` is an integer expression with a value between 0 and 9 corresponding to the character '0' to '9' stored in `c`, and is thus, a valid subscript for the array `ndigit`.

The decision as to whether a character is a digit, a white space, or something else is made with the sequence

```c
if (c >= '0' && c <= '9')
    ++ndigit[c-'0'];
else if (c == ' ' || c == '\n' || c == '\t')
    ++nwhite;
else
    ++nother;
```

The pattern

```
if (condition)
    statement
else if (condition)
    statement
else
    statement
```

occurs frequently in programs as a way to express a multi-way decision. The code is simply read from the top until some _condition_ is satisfied; at that point the corresponding _statement_ part is executed, and the entire construction is finished. (Of course _statement_ can be several statements enclosed in braces.) If none of the conditions is satisfied, the _statement_ after the final `else` is executed if it is present. If the final `else` and _statement_ are omitted (as in the word count program), no action takes place. There can be an arbitrary number of

```
else if (condition)
    statement
```

groups between the initial `if` and the final `else`. As a matter of style, it is advisable to format this construction as we have shown, so that long decisions do not march off the right side of the page.

The `switch` statement, to be discussed in [Chapter 3](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap03.md), provides another way to write a multi-way branch that is particularly suitable when the condition being tested is simply whether some integer or character expression matches one of a set of constants. For contrast, we will present a `switch` version of this program in [Chapter 3](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap03.md).

**Exercise 1-12.** Write a program to print a histogram of the lengths of words in its input. It is easiest to draw the histogram horizontally; a vertical orientation is more challenging.