---
backward: "[[1.6 Arrays]]"
parent: "[[Welcome to C]]"
---
In C, a _function_ is equivalent to a subroutine or function in Fortran, or a procedure in PL/I, Pascal, etc. A function provides a convenient way to encapsulate some computation in a black box, which can then be used without worrying about its innards. Functions are really the only way to cope with the potential complexity of large programs. With properly designed functions, it is possible to ignore _how_ a job is done; knowing _what_ is done is sufficient. C is designed to make the use of functions easy, convenient and efficient; you will often see a function only a few lines long called only once, just because it clarifies some piece of code.

So far we have used only functions like `printf`, `getchar` and `putchar` that have been provided for us; now it's time to write a few of our own. Since C has no exponentiation operator like the `**` of Fortran or PL/I, let us illustrate the mechanics of function definition by writing a function `power(m, n)` to raise an integer in to a positive integer power n. That is, the value of `power(2, 5)` is 32. This function certainly doesn't do the whole job of `**` since it handles only positive powers of small integers, but it's best to confuse only one issue at a time.

Here is the function `power` and a `main` program to exercise it, so you can see the whole structure at once.
```c
#include <stdio.h>

main() /* test power function */
{
    int i;

    for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
        printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2,i), power(-3,i));
}

power(x, n) /* raise x to n-th power; n > 0 */
int x, n;
{
    int i,p;

    p = 1;
    for (i = 1; i <= n; ++i)
        p = p * x;
    return (p);
}
```

Each function has the same form:
```
name (argument list, if any)
argument declarations, if any
    declarations
    statements
```

The functions can appear in either order, and in one source file or in two. Of course if the source appears in two files, you will have to say more to compile and load it than if it all appears in one, but that is an operating system matter, not a language attribute. For the moment, we will assume that both functions are in the same file, so whatever you have learned about running C programs will not change.

The function `power` is called twice in the line

```c
printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2,i), power(-3,i));
```

Each call passes two arguments to `power`, which each time returns an integer to be formatted and printed. In an expression, `power(2, i)` is an integer just as `2` and `i` are. (Not all functions produce an integer value; we will take this up in [Chapter 4](https://www.cc4e.com/book/chap04.md).)

In `power` the arguments have to be declared appropriately so their types are known. This is done by the line

```c
int x, n;
```

that follows the function name. The argument declarations go between the argument list and the opening left brace; each declaration is terminated by a semicolon. The names used by `power` for its arguments are purely _local_ to `power`, and not accessible to any other function: other routines can use the same names without conflict. This is also true of the variables `i` and `p`: the `i` in `power` is unrelated to the `i` in `main`.

The value that `power` computes is returned to `main` by the `return` statement, which is just as in PL/I. Any expression may occur within the parentheses. A function need not return a value; a `return` statement with no expression causes control, but no useful value, to be returned to the caller, as does "falling off the end" of a function by reaching the terminating right brace.

**Exercise 1-13.** Write a program to convert its input to lower case, using a function `lower(c)` which returns `c` if `c` is not a letter, and the lower case value of `c` if it is a letter.